# Theory part 25/06/2015

## Point 1

### Question

(3.0 points) Write the sequence of instructions that allow the bash process to interpret and execute the command

    `p1 | p2 > f1.txt`

where p1 and p2 are two executable files.

### Solution

```c
int fds[2];
pipe(fds);
if(!fork()) {
    // child (p1)
    close(fds[0]); // close read end of pipe
    close(1);
    dup(fds[1]); // p1 writes to pipe
    close(fds[1]); // write pipe duplicated
    execlp("p1", "p1", NULL);
    exit(255); // reached only on exec fail
}
close(fds[1]);
if(!fork()) {
    // child (p2)
    close(0);
    dup(fds[0]); // p2 reads from pipe
    close(fds[0]);
    close(1);
    open("f1.txt", O_WRONLY | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, 0640); // p2 writes to file
    execlp("p2", "p2", NULL);
    exit(255); // reached only on exec fail
}
close(fds[0]);
wait(NULL);
wait(NULL);
```

## Point 2

### Question

(3.0 points) List the steps to create a bootdisk with a minimal Linux kernel.

### Solution

* create a file `hd.img` with the utility `dd` in order to have enough space on it (using seek option)
* setup a loop device using `losetup` that points to the file `hd.img`
* create on the file a partition scheme with MBR that contains a partition and make that partition bootable (using `fdisk`)
* detach the loopback device and recreate the loopback but binding the `hd.img` file with a starting offset, to skip the master boot record and binding the created partition
* create a file system on the loopback device
* mount the loopback device on a folder
* copy into this folder the grub stages 1 and 2 and other files (grub menu and grub configuration)
* unmount
* detach loopback (`losetup -d`)

## Point 3

### Question

(4.0 points) Explain the behaviour of `WaitForSingleObject` and `WaitForMultipleObjects` in WIN32.  
Are calls to the two functions blocking? What can we wait for, with the two functions? How many, and which, different synchronization schemes are possible through WFMO? Is it possible to use WFMO in order to wait for one among multiple events/objects?  
What does constant `WAIT_OBJECT_0` represent?

Given the following loop, where the tHandles array is an array of handles of running threads, and processThreadResult works on the result produced by a thread, explain what the loop does.

```c
/* wait thread completion 1 */
for (iThrd = 0; iThrd < N; iThrd++) {
    WaitForSingleObject (tHandles[iThrd], INFINITE);
    processThreadResult (tData[iThrd]);
}
```

Since the loop forces a given order in waiting for thread completion, write an alternative loop, based on `WaitForMultipleObjects`, where thread results are processed following an order given by thread completions.

### Solution

`WaitForSingleObject` and `WaitForMultipleObjects` can be used to wait for handles to be in a signalled state. The handle can for example represent a file, an event, a mutex, a semaphore, a thread.  
Both function have a parameter that can be used to choose a timeout for the operation. Depending on this parameter the call can be blocking (timeout = INFINITE) or not (timeout = 0) or a timed wait (with a finite timeout).  
`WaitForSingleObject` waits for a single handle, while `WaitForMultipleObjects` waits for more (up to WAIT_MAXIMUM_OBJECTS) handles passed as an array. The last function has a boolean parameter (`bWaitAll`) that specifies the synchronization scheme:

* `bWaitAll = TRUE` means that the function will return only after all the handles are in signalled states (or timeout expired)
* `bWaitAll = FALSE` means that the function will return after at least one handle is signalled. To identify it in the array, the return value of the function must be subtracted with the constant `WAIT_OBJECT_0` and this will produce the index to be used to access the array.

The loop in the example is iterating over the array of handles: waits for the thread to be ended and then processes its result. The loops forces an order of execution, and we may loose time waiting for a thread while results of other threads could be processed. To avoid this, another synchronization scheme must be used.

```c
INT i, n, iThrd;
LPINT indexes = calloc(N, sizeof(INT));
// initialize the indexes
for (i = 0; i < N; i++) {
    indexes[i] = i;
}
n = N;
while (n > 0) {
    i = WaitForMultipleObjects(n, tHandles, INFINITE) - WAIT_OBJECT_0; // i is the index in the shrinked array
    iThrd = indexes[i]; // this is the real index of the thread
    indexes[i] = indexes[--n]; // shrink the indexes
    tHandles[i] = tHandles[n]; // shrink the handles (the last one is put in the current positon)
    processThreadResult(tData[iThrd]); // the tData array elements cannot be moved because accessed by the thread
}
```

## Point 4

### Question

(2.5 points) Explain the main features of dynamic libraries in Win32. Motivate the main advantages of dynamic libraries vs. static ones.  
Explain the difference between implicit and explicit linking. What kind of modification is required by a program in order to become a dynamic library (answer for both implicit and explicit linking).

### Solution

DLL are dinamic libraries that can be loaded by an executable without need of having to compile togheter the source files. The compilation processes of the library and of the executable are indipendent. In this way, the executable can be launched with different versions of the library by simply substituting the DLL file. There are also advantages in terms of memory occupation: a DLL can be loaded by multiple processes, occupying (a bit more than) the dimension of a single instance of the DLL. Static libraries instead are compiled together with the executable and occupy their whole size, also if they are not used.  
Implicit linking is done by declaring functions used of the dll as extern, by using the `__declspec(dllimport)` modifier and by linking the executable together with a `.lib` file that contains the stubs of the functions. At **load time**, the corresponding `.dll` file is searched and loaded automatically.  
Explicit linking instead requires more effort to the programmer, that manually need to load the library and the functions when needed (by calling `LoadLibrary` and `GetProcAddress`) but does not need to link the executable together with the `.lib` file. In this way the library is loaded at **runtime**.  
In order to become a dynamic library, the library needs to export the functions that will be callable from the outside by using the `__declspec(dllexport)` modifier.

## Point 5

### Question

(2.5 points) Which are the roles of files pointers and of the overlapped structures in direct file access on WIN32 systems. Briefly describe common aspects and differences. Provide a brief example of application for both of them. How can we increment by 100 bytes a file pointer in an overlapped structure? (provide an example)  
Does an overlapped structure include an event? Is it automatically created? When is it signaled?

### Solution

Files pointers are automatically moved ahead by read/write operations. But they can be set manually to the desired position e.g. if working with fixed-record-size files to perform direct file access in the next read/write operation.

```c
//FilePointers
BOOL recordReadFilePointer(HANDLE hFile, LPRECORD r, DWORD record_number) {
    ULARGE_INTEGER li;
    DWORD nRead;
    li.QuadPart = ((LONGLONG)record_number) * sizeof(RECORD);
    if(!SetFilePointerEx(hFile, li, NULL, FILE_BEGIN)) {
        return FALSE;
    }
    return (ReadFile(hFile, r, sizeof(RECORD), &nRead, NULL) && (nRead == sizeof(RECORD)));
}
```

Overlapped structures also provide direct access, but instead of moving the file pointer and then performing the access, they are passed directly to the read/write function, that won't use the file pointer for this operation but will use the Offset and OffsetHigh fields of the overlapped structure.

```c
//Overlapped
BOOL recordReadOverlapped(HANDLE hFile, LPRECORD r, DWORD record_number) {
    ULARGE_INTEGER li;
    DWORD nRead;
    OVERLAPPED ov = {0,0,0,0,NULL};
    li.QuadPart = ((LONGLONG)record_number) * sizeof(RECORD);
    ov.Offset = li.LowPart;
    ov.OffsetHigh = li.HighPart;
    return (ReadFile(hFile, r, sizeof(RECORD), &nRead, &ov) && (nRead == sizeof(RECORD)));
}
```

The following code increases the file pointer of an overlapped structure by 100 bytes:

```c
BOOL increaseFilePointer(LPOVERLAPPED ov, DWORD quantity) {
    ULARGE_INTEGER li;
    ULONGLONG old_value;
    li.LowPart = ov->Offset;
    li.HighPart = ov->OffsetHigh;
    old_value = li.QuadPart;
    li.QuadPart += quantity;
    if(li.QuadPart < old_value) {
        // overflow
        return FALSE;
    }
    ov.Offset = li->LowPart;
    ov.OffsetHigh = li->HighPart;
    return TRUE;
}

// call the function
increaseFilePointer(ov, 100);
```

An overlapped structure includes an event, that has to be manually created before using the overlapped structure for performing read/write operations. It is signalled when a read/write operation on a file opened with the `FILE_FLAG_OVERLAPPED` flag has been completed (and the operation was submitted by passing the overlapped structure containing the event).