# Theory part 18/09/2014

## Point 1

### Question

(3.0 marks) Explain the main features of asynchronous I/O (in WIN 32) based on extended I/O with completion routines: ReadFileEx, WriteFileEx.  
Why and how this is different from asynchronous I/O based on the overlapped structures?  
Given a binary file containing a sequence of integer numbers, is it possible to write a main program that, using asynchronous I/O, just searches a given number in the file? If yes, can it be done with both overlapped I/O and with completion routines? Why/How? *(source code is not required)*

### Solution

Asynchronous I/O works as follows:

* There is an handle to a file that has been opened with the flag `FILE_FLAG_OVERLAPPED`
* The thread calls a function like `ReadFileEx` or `WriteFileEx`, passing an additional argument that is the completion routine to be called. In this way the I/O operation is submitted and can start.
* The thread, later on, goes to an **alertable wait state** by calling one of the functions like `SleepEx`, `WaitForSingleObjectEx`, `WaitForMultipleObjectEx`. At this point the completion routines that correspond to completed I/O are executed in the current thread. If no I/O requests are completed, the thread waits for at least one of them, and then executes its completion routine.
* The thread is resumed its normal execution (and exits from the alertable state).

The main differences with asynchronous overlapped I/O are:

* The event is not used. The `hEvent` in the overlapped structure can be used by the programmer to store some data useful to the completion routine.
* The synchronization scheme has more possibilities: on completion of I/O the programmer can execute arbitrary code instead of only having an event signalled.
* The programmer can create some "recursive" schemes by making the completion routine to submit a new I/O operation.

Given the binary file containing a sequence of integer numbers, it is possible to write a main program that searches a given number.

By using overlapped I/O:

* The main splits (logically) the file into partitions. For each one of them it creates an event (manual reset).
* The main submits a bunch of read requests (on the first partitions) by passing overlapped structures containing the corresponding event
* The main enters a loop in which:
  * Waits for the array of events (not all, only the ones that correspond to current reads) by using `WaitForMultipleObjects` with `bWaitAll` to `FALSE`
  * When an event is signalled, searches into the corresponding read partition the number
  * If the number is found, the submitted read requests are aborted (by calling `CancelIoEx`)
  * Else another read is submitted (updating the array of handles to events) if there are still partitions to read

By using completion routines:

* The main splits (logically) the file into partitions.
* The main submits the read of the first partition by passing a completion routine
* The main waits for the search to be ended
* The completion routine searches in the read data the number
* If the number is found (or the file finished), sets a flag that can be seen by the main and returns
* If the number is not found, launches another read by passing itself as a completion routine (after having modified the offset in the overlapped structure)

## Point 2

### Question

 (3 0 marks) Explain the roles of conditional variables and mutexes as thread synchronization primitives in WIN32 systems. Outline the main differences between them. Provide an example of usage *(Pseudo-code is allowed)*.  
 Is it possible to use them to synchronise two processes? *(motivate the answer)*

### Solution

Condition variables are powerful synchronization primitives that allow threads to sleep and being woken up by other threads while owning a lock. The main operations on a condition variable are:

* sleep (`SleepConditionVariableCS` or `SleepConditionVariableSRW`): the lock owned is released and the threads goes to sleep atomically
* signal (`WakeOneConditionVariable`): one of the threads sleeping on the condition variable is woken up (returning from the sleep call with the lock owned)
* broadcast (`WakeAllConditionVariable`): all the threads sleeping on the condition variable are woken up (returns will be serialized because the lock can be owned only by a single thread, so the second thread needs to wait until the first releases it and so on)

Condition variables are very useful together with a lock to provide a way to notify other threads that a protected variable has been updated.

In WIN32 systems the lock can be a `CRITICAL_SECTION` object or a `SRW_LOCK` (that is passed as parameter to the sleep call). `CONDITION_VARIABLE` are variables in the user space. They can be more efficient than system objects because they can wait in the user space in some cases avoiding to invoke system calls. The condition variable uses an internal spin count (that can't be adjusted) to make some looping in the user space before using the system call to sleep.

```c
CRITICAL_SECTION me;
CONDITION_VARIABLE cs;
InitializeCriticalSection(&me);
InitializeConditionVariable(&cs);


// this thread needs to have 5 available resources
...
EnterCriticalSection(&me);
while(resources->count < 5) {
    SleepConditionVariableCS(&cs, &me);
}
// now there are at least 5 resources
myResources = GetResources(resources, 5);
LeaveCriticalSection(&me);
...


// producer thread
...
EnterCriticalSection(&me);
PutResource(resources, res);
WakeAllConditionVariable(&cs);
LeaveCriticalSection(&me);
...
```

Instead mutexes are kernel system objects that can be accessed only by using a HANDLE, and provide mutial exclusion. They keep the ownership and are recursive. They can also have a name. Since they are inside the kernel, they can be used also to synchronize between different processes (it is required to share the handle in some way or simply agreeing on the name).

```c
HANDLE me;
me = CreateMutex(NULL, FALSE, NULL);
...
WaitForSingleObject(me, INFINITE);
// access protected data
ReleaseMutex(me);
```

## Point 3

### Question

 (3.0 marks) Explain the behaviour of `CreateFileMapping`, `OpenFileMapping`, and `MapViewOfFile` in WIN 32. What does the `HANDLE` returned by `CreateFileMapping`? Does `MapViewOfFile` return a pointer or a `HANDLE`?

Given program fragment written below, explain its behaviour, assuming that function `SortIntegerArray` implements a sorting algorithm.  
What is done at each iteration?  
Complete the two instructions assigning values to high and low (assuming that their values need to be properly generate from offset).  
What are `hmap` and `pView`?

```c
...
HANDLE hmap = CreateFileMapping(hfile,...);
if (hmap != NULL) {
    for (offset = 0; offset < cbFile; offset += cbView){
        ...
        high = ...
        low = ...
        int *pView = MapViewOfFile(hmap, FILE_MAP_READ, high, low, cbView);
        if (pView != NULL) {
            SortIntegerArray(pView, cbView/(sizeof (int)));
        }
    }
}
CloseHandle(hmap);
```

### Solution

`CreateFileMapping` is for creating a new / opening an existent file mapping object. The function `OpenFileMapping` instead requires the file mapping object to already being existent. A mapping object is an object that can have a name that con be used by different processes to open the same object. A file mapping object is associated with a file (by passing its handle as a parameter in the creation) and has a maximum dimension (that can expand the file size in the moment of creation of te mapping). Once a mapping handle is obtained, the function `MapViewOfFile` can be called several times in order to obtain views on specified portions of the file. This last function returns a void pointer, that can be casted to whatever type and used in the preferred way.

The program fragment creates a file mapping on the file corresponding to the handle `hFile` (that in this case must be opened with `GENERIC_WRITE | GENERIC_READ` permissions). The loop iterates on regions of size `cbView` that are mapped on the file in order, by calling the `MapViewOfFile` function, and are sorted using the `SortIntegerArray` function. The sorting in the virtual address space is reflected on the file.

To assign the high and low parts the following code is required:

```c
ULARGE_INTEGER uli;
uli.QuadPart = offset;
high = uli. HighPart;
low = uli.lowPart;
```

`hMap` is a handle to the file mapping object, while `pView` is the view address, casted to `int *` that can be used to access the file in the memory-like fashion, without explicitly performing I/O requests.