# UNIX

## Point 1

### Question

(3.0 marks) Which are the Unix commands for installing a new module, for listing the installed modules,
for removing modules? Standard IO functions, such as **printf** cannot be used in module programs, why?
Which function can be used instead? In which file does the output of a module go?

### Solution

* `insmod mymodule.ko` installs a new module corresponding to the file *mymodule.ko*
* `lsmod` lists the currently installed modules
* `rmmod mymodule` removes the module named *mymodule* from the installed ones

Standard I/O functions can't be used because:

* The code is executed in the memory space of the kernel, and therefore the standard I/O functions are not loaded
* The modules don't have standard handles (stdin, stdout, stderr) available because they don't have a terminal attached
* Modules are not designed to perform I/O on a terminal

The only output a module can have is the file var/log/messages that can be written by a module by using
the function **printk**. This file can be read by using normal editors or by using the command `dmesg`.
A module message written by using the **printk** function could appear on the current tty (not a pts) if
the warning level used is high.

## Point 2

### Question

(3.0 marks) Given this reference string:

`112233444412441221444322555543`

Compute the **page fault frequency and the mean resident set** for the **VMIN strategy**
with control parameter t=3. The VMIN strategy is similar to the Working-set strategy, but it looks
forward in time in the reference string rather than backward as the Working-set strategy does.

### Solution

VMIN strategy is described [on this page](http://www.ics.uci.edu/~bic/courses/NUS-OS/Lectures-on-line/ch08.pptx)
at page 28.

| Time           | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10| 11| 12| 13| 14| 15| 16| 17| 18| 19| 20| 21| 22| 23| 24| 25| 26| 27| 28| 29|
|:--------------:|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| **String**     | 1 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 1 | 2 | 4 | 4 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 1 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 2 | 2 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 3 |
|                |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
|                | 1 | 1 | 2 | 2 | 3 | 3 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 | 4 |   |   |   |   | 4 | 4 | 4 | 3 | 2 | 2 | 5 | 5 | 5 | 4 | 3 |
|                |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 | 1 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
|                |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 | 2 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| **Page Fault** | x |   | x |   | x |   | x |   |   | x | x |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | x |   |   | x | x |   | x |   |   | x | x |

Page fault rate = 12/29 = 41%

Mean Resident Set = 39/29 = 1.34

---

# WINDOWS

## Point 1

### Question

(2.0 marks) Briefly describe similarities and differences between WIN32 critical sections and mutexes.
Can critical sections be used to provide mutual exclusion between two threads? And two processes? *(motivate the answer)*

### Solution

Critical sections (CS) are user variables, that can reside in the stack or in the heap of a process.
Mutexes are instead kernel objects, that can be accessed only by using a handle. They are both used to
protect shared variables by giving mutual exclusion to sections of code that must be executed without
interleaving different flows of executions. The functions used for them are different: with CSs we
`EnterCriticalSection` and `LeaveCriticalSection` while with Mutexes we `WaitForSingleObject` and `ReleaseMutex`.  
CSs can be used to synchronize between threads belonging to the same process, because the addressing space is the
same, so the threads can access the same variable.  
CSs can't be used to synchronize between different processes because the addressing space is different.

## Point 2

### Question

(3.0 marks) Explain the role of filter expressions in `try...except` blocks. Why/when do the following block call the Filter functions?

```c
__try {
  __try {
    // statements
    ...
  } __except(Filter1(GetExceptionCode()));
} __except(Filter2(GetExceptionCode()));
```

Are `Filter1` and `Filter2` system routines or user-generated functions?  
What is the role of `GetExceptionCode()` ? Under which conditions is `Filter2` called?  
Is `Filter2` called when `Filter1` return `EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION` ? *(motivate all yes/no answers)*

### Solution

The filter expressions must be written to determine if the corresponding `__except` block must be executed.
Their return value can be:

* `EXCEPTION_EXECUTE_HANDLER`: `__except` block is executed and the search is stopped
* `EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH`: stack unwinding proceeds to search for a filter that captures this exception
* `EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION`: if the exception is continuable, the execution proceeds normally

`Filter1` is called if an exception is generated inside the inner `__try` block.  
`Filter2` is called if `Filter1` return `EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_SEARCH` or if an exception is generated in `Filter1`.  
`Filter1` and `Filter2` are user-generated functions/values/macros.  
`GetExceptionCode` is needed to provide to the filters the exception code (can't be called from within a filter).  
If `Filter1` return `EXCEPTION_CONTINUE_EXECUTION`, `Filter2` is not executed (for this exception, maybe later with another exception).

## Point 3

### Question

(4.0 marks) Explain the role of completion functions in extended (alertable) asynchronous IO.  
A given file contains a sequence of NR fixed length records that can be described by the following C struct:

```c
typedef struct {
  data_t value;
  int next;
}
```

Type `data_t` is given (another struct). Records are numbered from 0 to NR-1, and they are organized in circular
linked lists, i.e. each record has a next field, containing the index of another record in the file. A very simple
file could contain the sequence: `{v0,3}, {v1,2}, {v2,1}, {v3,5}, {v4,0}, {v5,4}, {v6,7}, {v7,6}`. `(vi,j)` means that the
i-th record has a value field `vi` and a next index `j`. The file has 8 records organized in three circular lists
(0-3-5-4, 1-2, 6-7).  
Function `countCircularList` is in charge of counting the length of a circular list, given the file handle and the
index of one of the records in the list. Write the missing part of `countCircularList` and of the completion routine
`readDone` in order to achieve the counting task (use of global variables is allowed).

```c
DWORD countCircularList (HANDLE hFile, DWORD start) {
  ...
  ReadFileEx(hFile, ..., readDone);
  ...
}

VOID WINAPI readDone(DWORD Code, DWORD nBytes, LPOVERLAPPED pOv) {
  ...
  ReadFileEx(hFile, ..., readDone);
  ...
}
```

### Solution

Completion functions execute some code when the corresponding asynchronous
I/O operation is concluded. Instead of waiting the end of the operation synchronously
or waiting for an event to be in the signalled state (via normal overlapped asynchronous I/O),
the programmer has the freedom to write a function that will be executed on completion of the
operation, and manually manage the synchronization details.  
The file must be opened by specifying the `FILE_FLAG_OVERLAPPED` flag. The asynchronous operation
must be executed by calling an extended function (`ReadFileEx`, `WriteFileEx`) and at some point
the thread must enter in alertable state, calling `WaitForSingleObjectEx`/`WaitForMultipleObjectEx`/`SleepEx`.

```c
typedef struct {
  data_t value;
  int next;
} record; // give a name to the record struct

// global variables
DWORD start_global;
HANDLE hFile_global;
BOOL done;
DWORD count_global;
record record_global;

DWORD countCircularList (HANDLE hFile, DWORD start) {
  OVERLAPPED ov = {0,0,0,0,NULL};
  LARGE_INTEGER li;
  count_global = 0;
  start_global = start;
  hFile_global = hFile;
  done = FALSE;
  li.QuadPart = start * sizeof(record);
  ov.Offset = li.LowPart;
  ov.OffsetHigh = li.HighPart;
  ov.hEvent = start; // completion routine needs to know which record ??
  ReadFileEx(hFile, &record_global, sizeof(record), &ov, readDone);
  while(!done) {
    // enter in alertable state
    SleepEx();
  }
  return count_global;
}

VOID WINAPI readDone(DWORD Code, DWORD nBytes, LPOVERLAPPED pOv) {
  LARGE_INTEGER li;
  count_global++;
  if(record_global.next == start_global) {
    // end of list
    done = TRUE;
    return;
  }
  li.QuadPart = record_global.next * sizeof(record);
  memset(pOv, 0, sizeof(OVERLAPPED));
  pOv->Offset = li.LowPart;
  pOv->OffsetHigh = li.HighPart;
  ReadFileEx(hFile_global, &record_global, sizeof(record), pOv, readDone);
  return;
}
```