# Theory part 12/09/2016

## Point 1

### Question

(3.0 marks) How is organized the list of free blocks in a Unix filesystem? What is the funciton of an index block in the Unix filesystem, what happens to an index block when all the data it contains have been used?

### Solution

The free blocks list is organized in a list of index blocks. Each index block contains the pointer to the next block, and some pointers to free data blocks. The first index block is stored inside the superblock of the partition. When a data block is requested, the pointer to the first data block inside the first index block is retrieved and removed from the index block. When the index block inside the superblock is requested to allocate the last data block indexed in it, the data block is returned and the content of the superblock is filled with the content of the next index block. Also the pointer to the next index block is updated.

## Point 2

### Question

(3.0 marks) Explain the meaning of the following command line, detailing the function of each argument

`qemu -serial mon:stdio -hda fs.img xv6.img -smp 2 -m 512 -S -gdb tcp::2600`

### Solution

The command calls `qemu`, a machine emulator, and the parameters are the following:

* `-serial mon:stdio` specifies to duplicate the stdin/stdout/stderr of the virtual machine in the current terminal window, to enable the user to send commands and read output not only in the emulator window, but also on the terminal window
* `-hda fs.img xv6.img` specifies the image files to attach to the virtual machine
* `-smp 2` specifies the number of virtual processors to the emulator
* `-m 512` specifies the amount of RAM in MB that the machine will be able to see
* `-S` the machine is launched in suspended state, waiting for a debugger to connect and send `continue`/`next` commands
* `-gdb tcp::2600` specifies that qemu will accept debugger connections on tcp port 2600

## Point 3

### Question

(2.0 marks) Explain, within the framework of win32 events, the difference between *pulse* and *set* behaviour. How is it possible to implement a semaphore using a counter variable and an event? Describe the kind of event used, and how the two semaphore operations can be implemented *(code is allowed but not required)*.

### Solution

Called on an event, `SetEvent` sets the state of the event to signalled, while `PulseEvent` sets the state to signalled and resets it after all the currently waiting threads have been unblocked.

|             | auto-reset | manual-reset
------------- | --- | ---
| `SetEvent`  | exactly one thread is released. If there are currently no threads waiting, the first one to arrive will be released | all the threads waiting are released. All new threads arriving will not be blocked until someone calls `ResetEvent`
| `PulseEvent`| exactly one waiting thread is released. If there are no threads waiting, no thread will be released when arriving to wait | all the threads waiting are released. New threads arriving will be blocked

## Point 4

### Question

(3.0 marks) Which are the roles of file pointers and of the overlapped structures in direct file access on WIN32 systems? Briefly describe common aspects and differences. The prototype of function `ReadFile` is:

```c
BOOL ReadFile (HANDLE hFile, LPVOID lpBuffer, DWORD nNumberOfBytesToRead, LPDWORD lpNumberOfBytesRead, LPOVERLAPPED lpOverlapped)
```

How can we handle pointers to large files? What is a LARGE_INTEGER type in Win32? How can we increment a LARGE_INTEGER variable by 1? Given a file of size 40 GB, containing records of fixed size 256 Bytes, how can we read record n. 2^27 (records are numbered starting from 0)?

Provide the solution with file pointers and with overlapped structure.

### Solution

Direct file access can be done both with file pointer and with overlapped structures. The offset at wich do the next I/O access is stored for each file HANDLE inside the system. The system updates this position at every I/O by adding to it the byte count of the completed operation. The system provides functions to read its value and update it.

To perform direct file access with file pointer the operations needed are:

* set the file pointer to the desired location
* perform the I/O operation

Also overlapped structures can be used to perform I/O. If such a structure is passed as parameter to `ReadFile` or `WriteFile`, the system will ignore the file pointer and will perform the I/O at the location specified by the memebers `Offset` and `OffsetHigh` of the overlapped structure. The file pointer is not increased during the I/O operation.

Similarities:

* both approaches perform direct file acces at the desired location

Differences:

* using overlapped structure does not read or update the file pointer
* using file pointers requires two function calls
* overlapped direct access is compulsory for asynchronous I/O
* more calls to asynchronous I/O using overlapped structures can be submitted concurrently and safely, without need to synchronize to protect the file pointer between the two required calls

Pointers to large file (more than 4GB) require 64 bits. A large pointer can be set by splitting it in two 32-bits DWORD variables and passing the two parts as parameters to the `SetFilePointer` function, or can be set with a specific data-type and passed as a single parameter to the `SetFilePointerEx`.

The specific data type, also useful for managing the split of 64-bits in two parts, is `LARGE_INTEGER`/`ULARGE_INTEGER`. These two types are a union of a 64-bit variable (`QuadPart`) and a structure containing two 32-bits variables (`HighPart` and `LowPart`). Since it is a union, `QuadPart` can be set and `HighPart` and `LowPart` will contain the proper values.

`LARGE_INTEGER` is the signed version: `QuadPart` is `LONGLONG`, `HighPart` is `LONG` and `LowPart` is `DWORD`. `ULARGE_INTEGER` is the unsigned version: `QuadPart` is `ULONGLONG`, `HighPart` and `LowPart` are `DWORD`. Although they are different, in practice they are used always to contain unsigned numbers (on 64-bits they will be wrongly interpreted as negative only if the most significant bit is 1, that is a very big number).

The following code increments a `LARGE_INTEGER` variable by 1:

```c
LARGE_INTEGER li = ...;
li.QuadPart++;
```

Given a file of size 40 GB, containing records of fixed size 256 Bytes, to read record n. `2^27` two strategies are applied:

```c
HANDLE hFile;
DWORD nRead;
RECORD record; // sizeof(RECORD) = 128
LARGE_INTEGER li;
li.QuadPart = 256 << 27;

// file pointers
SetFilePointerEx(hFile, li, NULL, FILE_BEGIN); // or SetFilePointer(hFile, li.LowPart, &li.HighPart, FILE_BEGIN);
ReadFile(hFile, &record, sizeof(record), &nRead, NULL);

// overlapped
OVERLAPPED ov = {0, 0, 0, 0, NULL};
ov.Offset = li.LowPart;
ov.OffsetHigh = li.HighPart;
ReadFile(hFile, &record, sizeof(RECORD), &nRead, &ov);
```

## Point 5

### Question

(4.0 marks) In the following code section, `se` is a global semaphore and `TraverseAndSaveList` is a thread function.

```c
HANDLE se;
static void TraverseAndSaveList (LPTSTR fullPath, LPTSTR dirName, HANDLE fileHandle);
```

`TraverseAndSaveList` **recursively** visits the directory named `dirName` and it stores **all** encountered entry names in the file referenced by `fileHandle`.

The variable `fullPath` represents the full file system path to `dirName`. If, for instance, the target directory is `a/b/c`, `fullPath` is `a/b` and `dirName` is `c`.

As `TraverseAndSaveList` is a thread (concurrent) function, each write operation on the `fileHandle` file has to be propery synchronized threugh the `se` semaphore.

The format of the file `fileHandle` is free.

Write function `TraverseAndSaveList` to perform the requested operations.

### Solution


```c
HANDLE se;
static void TraverseAndSaveList (LPTSTR fullPath, LPTSTR dirName, HANDLE fileHandle) {
    DWORD fType;
    HANDLE hSearch;
    WIN32_FIND_DATA wfd;
    TCHAR searchPath[MAX_PATH], newPath;
    TCHAR fileName[MAX_PATH];
    _stprintf(searchPath, _T("%s\\%s\\*"), fullPath, dirName);
    hSearch = FindFirstFile(searchPath, &wfd);
    do {
        _stprintf(newPath, _T("%s\\%s"), fullPath, dirName);
        fType = FileType(&wfd);
        if(fType == TYPE_DIR) {
            TraverseAndSaveList(newPath, wfd.cFileName, fileHandle);
        } else if(fType == TYPE_FILE) {
            memset(fileName, 0, sizeof(TCHAR) * MAX_PATH);
            _stprintf(fileName, _T("%s\\%s"), newPath, wfd.cFileName);
            WaitForSingleObject(se, INFINITE);
            WriteFile(fileHandle, wfd.cFileName, sizeof(TCHAR) * MAX_PATH, NULL, NULL);
            ReleaseSemaphore(se, 1, NULL);
        }
    } while (FindNextFile(hSearch, &wfd));
}
```