# Theory questions

## Point 1

### Question

(4.0 marks) Write the sequence of instructions that allow the bash process to interpret and execute the command

`p1 < f1.txt | p2`

where `p1` and `p2` are two executable files.

### Answer

```c
int fds[2];
pipe(fds);
if(!fork()) {
    // child (p1)
    close(fds[0]); // close read end of pipe
    close(0);
    open("f1.txt", O_RDONLY); // 0
    close(1);
    dup(fds[1]); // 1
    close(fds[1]); // close also write end, it's dupped into 1
    execlp("p1", "p1", NULL);
    exit(255); // only if exec fails
}
close(fds[1]);
if(!fork()) {
    // child (p2)
    close(0);
    dup(fds[0]); //0
    close(fds[0]);
    execlp("p2", "p2", NULL);
    exit(255); // only if exec fails
}
close(fds[0]);
wait(NULL); // wait a child
wait(NULL); // wait the other child
```

## Point 2

### Question

(3.0 marks) Describe the **logical** sequence of instructions that allow an Intel CPU to switch from the real mode to the protected mode during booting, and the **logical** sequenc of instructions that allow an Intel CPU to enable paging.

### Answer

From real mode to protected mode:

1. Disable interrupts (also unmaskable ones)
2. Load GDT
3. Set lowest bit of register CR0 to 1
4. Perform a long jump in order to load register CS

Enable paging:

1. Load register CR3 with the directory page table address
2. Set highest bit of register CR0 to 1

## Point 3

(2.0 marks) Show the syntax and describe the function of the system call **popen**.

### Answer

The system call **popen** has the following signature: `FILE *popen(const char *command, const char *type)`.

* `command` is the command to be run
* `type` can be `"r"` or `"w"`
* the return value is an open FILE

`popen` does some I/O redirection (based on `type`) and runs the command.

If `type` is `"w"`, the FILE can be used to send input to the command. If it is `"r"`, the output of the command can be read from the FILE.

The FILE must be closed using `pclose`.

## Point 4

### Question

(3.0 marks) Briefly explain the difference between **implicit** and **explicit linking** within the framework of Win32 DLLs. Answer the following questions *(motivate all yes/no answers)*:

* Can a DLL include routines that are NOT thread safe?
* Can a DLL be used to share global variables between any two processes? Can memory mapped files be used to share global variables between any two processes?
* Given the same DLL source code (including 10 library functions), can explicit linging (of the DLL within an executable file) provide less memory usage than implicit linking?

### Answer

Implicit linking requires some work both in code writing and in compile procedure. In the source that uses the DLL, there must be a `_declspec(dllimport)` modifier before the prototype of the functions that are needed for usage. The calls to these function are like any other call to an extern function. At compilation time, the source must be linked with the corresponding `.lib` file, that contains the stubs for the functions of the DLL. At runtime the stubs will load (if necessary) the `.dll` file library that effectively contains the procedures needed.

Explicit linking requires more work in code writing but no extra-work in compile procedure. The source code does not need to declare the `dllimport` prototypes. But when the programmer wants to use a function of a DLL, the steps needed are:

* call `LoadLibrary` passing the name of the DLL file. This will return a HMODULE handle
* call `GetProcAddress` passing the HMODULE and the name of the function needed. This will return a FARPROC
* cast from FARPROC to the actual prototype of the function
* invoke the function

Explicit linking does not require the `.lib` file, and compilation is done in the normal way.

* A DLL should not include routines that are not thread safe. It is dangerous because we can never know which processes will load our DLL, so the only way is to prevent every possible condition by making it thread safe.
* A DLL can't be used to share global variables between processes, because every process loading it will have a different copy of it in its own addressing space. There is a workaround to this behavior, by using the `data_seg` pragma. Instead memory mapped files can be used to share variables between processes, they only must agree on the shared file path or on the shared memory mapping name (one calls `CreateFileMapping` assigning a name and the other calls `OpenFileMapping`).
* Explicit linking can provide less memory usage than implicit linkink, because a DLL can be very large, but if the programmer needs only some functions of it, there would be a big overhead in implicit linking (that loads every function of the DLL). Instead by using explicit linking, only the used functions need to be loaded.

## Point 5

### Question

(3.0 marks) Given the (partial) Win32 producer/consumer code in figure, briefly explain its behavior (limited to the instructions reported) and answer the following questions *(motivate the yes/no answers)*:

* Is the mutex always released by the producer, also after an exception occurrs while filling the message?
* Is it possible to have multiple consumers reading tha same message? If yes, how should the event be set in order to just activate all consumers waiting when the event is set?
* Would the producer have the same behavior after swapping the `try...finally` and the `try...except` blocks?

```c
// Producer
WaitForSingleObject(mblock.mguard, INFINITE);
__try {
    __try {
        ...
        MessageFill(&mblock);
        SetEvent(mblock.mready); /* Signal that a message is ready */
        ...
    }
    __finally { ReleaseMutex (mblock.mguard); }
}
__except (EXCEPTION_EXECUTE_HANDLER) {
    printf("Exception while Filling a message\n");
}

// Consumer
WaitForSingleObject(mblock.mready, INFINITE);
WaitForSingleObject(mblock.mguard, INFINITE);
__try {
    ...
    MessageDisplay(&mblock);
    ...
}
__finally { ReleaseMutex(mblock.mguard); }
```

### Answer

TODO